Yesterday you talked about opening the mandala when we did Vajrayana practice. What are we opening
to? Is it like the
Yalaya, or Rigpa, or the world of invisible beings? All of them! But generally it is the
ceremonial in the sadhana, Vajrayana sadhana ceremony, and when we did this Vajrayana ceremony,
these all practices are summarized into two categories that you all know, visualization,
meditation, and completion meditation, two meditations. So when we do the sadhana, this
visualization, that means we are now going to begin to emanate the display of the primordial,
our own awareness, and many beautiful, wonderful displays. And so that means that now we begin to
open the mandala. So the mandala of the display of the deity or the Buddha, all that really begins
to
open, that's the opening. Okay. Yes, yes. Yes, Rampashe. I have a question about karma. So as we
get on in life, as we get older, we begin to see that we didn't do everything perfectly, and we
begin to think that there were occasions where, and we know there were occasions where we did not
do
the best for other people, that we may not have helped them as we should have, that we may have
actually misrepresented ourselves to them in terms of our relationship with them, and as a result
we
feel that we have accumulated karma. What should we do about that? Well, that is generally
wonderful
to recognize. Seeing that is really, number one, the best, is the best. Many times how we do, we
all,
we ignore. Even somebody reminds us we get immediately upset. You say, "Oh, you're criticizing
me. You're accusing me that. You're insulting me that." We're trying to block that, kind of to
shield up to our whatever that mistakes. Really, we do that many times. We're trying to kind of
depending that instead, "Oh, that is true. I should do this." So when we recognize, it's so
wonderful. Number one is really recognize, reconnections. Once we recognize that, then
such as many different ways to purify that, and such as then practice of the Vedya Sattva,
according to the teaching that says, and those are then in the teaching said, "poor powers."
Power of the visualization of the meditation on the Vedya Sattva, and the power of the
recognitions. Recognize that. And the power of the uprooting, that I'm going to really clean that.
At the same time, they're known as the power of the commitment that I'm not going to repeat that
again. And by the blessings of the Buddhas and all that, may I never repeat that again. Had those
poor powers in the teaching said, "If you have the poor power, apply that with the practices,
practices, meditation, even as huge, as big as a mountain, it will really clean up in the teaching
said that." And there's so many stories that, I mean, the Buddha's teaching, you're in the
example, Arya Chaturv, the one who really did bad karma, that he killed his own father, father,
kings. And then he also disturbed the Sangha members. Sangha members are generally known as
group of the harmony and peace and respect and appreciation. But if you really smile at that,
again a group, is one of the worst karmas that you can do. And one of the worst karmas is also
known as
the killing of one's own parents and many. And Arya Chaturv did this, this, and as well as,
although he's trying to kill the Buddha too. But once he really recognized that he's, that mistakes
,
all that, he came to the Buddha and he said that, "I've had terrible mistakes and all these things,
so what I do?" And then he believed that what Buddha taught all the teachings and practices,
and then he purified according to teaching that. He really purified that. So those are the examples
of that. But number one is, among the four powers, number one is to recognize that is so important.
Okay. Thank you, Rinpoche. Thank you.
For what's called recognize or acknowledge our, yeah, acknowledge.
Rinpoche, thank you so much for coming. Oh, thank you. There are thousands of teachers
just in the United States and then many more teachings. And there are teachers, of course,
who are not the Buddha. Is it a mistake to look at a teacher who is not the Buddha as the Buddha?
Is it a mistake to look at a teacher as a Buddha when he's not?
That is, it depends. Every you have, it depends individually. Every you have really strong
devotions. It's a question about the devotions. Every you have the strong devotion,
then sing as a teacher, sing teacher as a Buddha. Then it's okay. It's okay. But otherwise,
always do the intellectual way. Intellectual way, exam the teacher and teachers' activity,
teachers' teaching, and follow the teaching. So what do we get? If we follow the intellectual way,
what the gracious teacher Buddha Shakyamuni said, "Don't trust on the person, but trust on the
teaching." So, trust on the teaching. But teaching also, don't trust teaching on the world, W-O-R-D
,
but trust on the meaning of the world. And also, not just trust the meaning of the relative level,
but the meaning of the absolute level. Trust on the meaning of the absolute level. And not just
trust, also when you realize trust on the absolute level, not just trusting on the conceptual level
,
but trying to, I'm not trying, trust on the non-conceptual way. Those are the more intellectual
way. And that is the very good approach. Approach and stable. Then once you really develop the
strong
devotion and that, then you can have the teacher as a Buddha. But it's developed a good,
strong confidence and good practices. And relying on the Dharma or the symbol to rely on the Dharma
is more important than relying on the individualist. Thank you.
Yes, yes.
Rempoche, you and many great masters have often said, "Each Buddha contains all other Buddhas,
each wisdom contains all wisdoms." But this question is about the five Dhyani Buddhas and
Buddha families. So, we who have taken refuge in this lineage, all are members of the Pema family.
We have Dharma names that are Pema, this and that. So, my smallest question is,
I've never heard the word Dhyani translated. Is it possible to translate? If so, what's a good
translation? Dhyani translated as in Tibet or in India? I think it's a family.
Ah, all right. Thank you. And secondly, is it as simple as all Nyingma lineage practitioners
are members of the Pema family, all Kagus or Karma, or is it not quite that simple?
No, no, no. That is, I mean, there could be, but it's not exactly that way. Pema family,
as you said, in the teachings, said that generally all Buddhas are because they
contains all other Buddhas. What that actually really means, that each of Buddhas,
the nature is all Buddhas, nature of their wisdoms. And not just only all the Buddhas,
even our nature of the mind is the nature of all the Buddhas. What that also means,
what is the nature of the Buddha? The nature of the Buddha is loving kindness,
compassion, and wisdoms. That is really the nature of the Buddhas. That is really
the ultimate state of the Buddhas. So our love, our compassion, our wisdom, not disturbed by the
duality, is the nature of the enlightenment. That enlightenment of the Buddhas, that's why
gracious teacher, Buddha, said that every living being has the same potential or the nature as I do
.
Do that. So therefore, all that. So now, Pema family, for example, Pema family is,
in the Pema family level, Pema family in Bodhim and all five Dhyana Buddhas.
Pema family is not just a Pema family, but Pema family of the Buddha family.
Pema family of the Carma family, Pema family of the Rena family, Pema family,
family of the Pema family, Pema family of the Karma families. So within the five,
Pema family is in Bodhim and all five Dhyana Buddhas, or not just all the Buddhas.
So that's really how it is. But then again, highlighted, represented that highway,
and then Amitabha represented more Pema family, and Vijay Sattva represented more
Vijay family, Rena Samba represented more Rena family, and so forth. Those are just
highlighted status, but reality level is really the same nature. They all represent all.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you.
Come on, remember Shain?
Yes, yes.
There we go.
Yep.
Thank you. I consider this to be a really tough question, and it pertains to daily practice.
If you look in the root text on page 21…
Okay, thank you. Again, if you can…
I could read the sentence.
No, because please read that mean it a bit.
Oh, it's a bit…
Oh, wow.
Arigato.
The statement that I can see…
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I looked a bit… Because my English, I mean, I'm speaking English,
but still my English is not really…
Oh, I hear it, Marianne.
Not…
21, the first new paragraph.
Okay, thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, now you're still, please.
Yeah, now you're safe.
To enter the path of Dharma, it is not enough to adopt its outer appearances.
We have to sever all ties to desirable things and to activities limited to this life.
I think that's a…
I believe that's a tough one.
I think I underestimated that one.
I think it is a piece of a case, if you can do.
If you can do.
Exactly.
Piece of a case.
Perfect response. I'm just going to point out that it does make it difficult
to be a bodhisattva and to go into a cave and live for 30 years.
But I accept the answer. If you can do it, it is a piece of cake.
And I thank you very much for that wisdom.
Thank you, sir.
No, but this is, of course, as you said, this is tough.
Definitely tough to everyone.
But it's not something that we're going to eliminate immediately.
We can do this.
But we're going to keep the courage and the commitment and our kind of like destination.
Keep this our goal.
So we're going to work continually on this again and again.
And gradually, our attachment, the unhealthy attachment, transform me to the good attachment
that love and kindness and compassion and joy and appreciation.
And then the power of death, then this unnecessary, those old kind of mundane,
mundane, very unhealthy attachment that we really do.
And that will be eliminated and develop more and more.
More than this, the good attitude, good qualities.
And then that when that happened, then it transformed all that into when you meditate in the
practice.
It transformed into then the equanimity status.
Equanimity status.
So then we don't really have to be concerned with this and that thing.
It's kind of like back and forth, back and forth.
But all is just our mind, is nothing else.
And our mind is the nature, as the teaching mentioned, is emptiness, openness,
is just fullness, infinite, freedom status.
So then we don't have to court too much on this status.
So that is what really is explaining that.
But at the beginning of the time, we should try to keep really courage and strong
so that we don't court always with this unnecessary mundane attachment,
bonding this situation.
That's what it really means.
Yes?
In the practice of the Prajna Paramita, in the Heart Chakra,
when we're talking about all things being emptiness,
when in your practice and when you realize that all things are emptiness
and you find that center and you learn to let go,
does that help all karma be dissipated?
Oh, definitely.
There's a dukti meditation or the Pandya Paramata meditation
is the one of the most powerful way to cleanse and the obscuration is karma.
It's really in the teachings.
Even some great in the teaching mentioned that if you meditate even a short time,
like for one or two, three minutes, there's a completely unknown duality status,
that will clean so many obscurations.
And really in the teaching said that.
That is so powerful.
So that is excellent.
It will cleanse and purify.
We need to cleanse the purify.
What it comes up, comes up more loving kindness,
more compassion, more joy and more appreciation,
more courage and a commitment, more patience, and then really grows.
Also, all the beautiful gala of the inner nature of the natural mind will shine so beautifully.
And all those disturbance of the mental state is kind of fading away.
That's about this practice.
And then the same time that all the karma that are also really fading away or clay away.
Thank you, Rinpoche.
Okay.
Thank you.
Harupoche, I have a question for you this morning.
Thank you for being here.
I just wanted to show some appreciation and gratitude for
learning from everyone and everybody being so kind.
It's an amazing way to start the day.
My question is on meditation.
Do you have, I guess some good advice on calming an incredibly overactive mind?
Because when I meditate sometimes after I'm done, I feel so frustrated when I just can't...
It seems like I'm trying to tame a wild horse that I have no control over.
And then other days, it's very productive.
But lately, you know, so do you have any good advice for really how to tame a horse?
That really happened to everyone.
Not just you or somebody, particularly in the beginning time.
For that is, the first is, first is really the mostly important, bring good attitudes.
For example, when you sit down on the cushion or on the chair, bring up more joy and appreciation.
Just for few seconds, few seconds.
And when you do that, what I will do?
It will really unnecessarily thought well, those old busyness, turbulence.
Well, calm down.
Then more also love and kindness compare thoughts.
Reaching good things for all living beings and include, of course,
yourself to really good wishes.
Reaching that for a short time.
Again, that is one of the very powerful way to calm down.
That busyness, that wild horse to bring down, really down there.
And then after that, feel strong.
If you feel close, if it's okay with you, comfortable with you, feel very close with the Buddha.
Buddha, all that, right in front, Buddha is meditating.
Meditating, sitting down, right in front of you.
You feel.
And the Buddha is so calm.
So peaceful.
So soothing.
So calming.
Emanating love with that energy of love or kindness or compassion.
Calming down peace that to you and to all the beings.
You're in a kind of almost that serenity, that in the sunshine of the bundled up within that state.
It's so warm and light.
And it's sitting there.
And then if you need something else, else with that, and then maybe focus some small object
or some mental object to right there or just hold that mental image.
Something concentrated on that for like two, three minutes.
Those, that all will calm down.
Calm down, it will really calm down what it does.
Then mind is reaching to its own natural status.
Its own kind of ground status.
So those are the dead.
Do that, meditate, sitting that way for whatever your time.
And also, kind of again, activate a good thought, intention.
Bring more joy and appreciation.
More compassion thought for the old, everyone's, for even two seconds or for one minute.
And then it's good.
And then that, clearly that energy, I mean, when you're in the world once in a while,
throughout the day, don't completely forget.
And that is really great mindfulness.
And it always bring back to your home.
Home, sweet home.
Thank you so much, Rinpoche.
So as we close this season, we are so grateful that we have had you sitting here
and we picture you here and we carry you with us.
But I really mean this question quite sincerely.
What is special about group practice when the teacher is not able to be here?
You know, that we carry on all year, even when you're not here.
And we offer our group practices.
And I know there are many practical reasons.
But for our development, are there special reasons to come and practice as a Sangha?
According to the teaching, according to lineage, the group practice is so powerful.
And what is called three jewels, Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.
And the Buddha, I think you all know.
Dharma, you all know.
Sangha means group, harmonious group.
Sangha, of course, is what we call one individual Sangha members.
But really to make Sangha is group, gindin, means group.
Sangha means group.
So what in the teaching you say that?
You have the four individuals practicing together.
That is known as Sangha, noble Sanghas.
Practice.
They are all meditating and practicing.
One person is good.
Two person is good.
But four people individually are practicing together.
That becomes really the true Sangha members.
And then in the teaching you say that also
one Sangha member, whatever the realization has that, is one.
But if you have two, add two.
If you have three, add three.
Add four, then add four.
So then it becomes one dollar.
Otherwise it's just a quarter, which is important, of course, important quarter.
And one stick, in the teaching you say that one broom,
and now maybe here we are coming and all those things.
But broom, of course, is how to clean the room in ancient times by broom.
Brooming.
But one is not broom.
But one that stick is not important.
It's not going to clean so much.
But if it's true, three, four is joined, then it becomes really broom.
Then really you can clean.
You can clean.
So according to the teaching, if you gather all that Sangha members get together
and practice harmony peacefully, it's really very powerful.
It's very powerful.
And that's called helping to each other, support to each other,
inspire to each other, and learn from to each other, and grow.
And deep or deepening.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you.
Then we stop here.
I think so.
Okay, then yeah, thank you.
Thank you, Rinpoche.
Thank you for a beautiful question to bring us all together as a group practicing continuously.
Rinpoche, I have this question about the union of
primordial purity and spontaneous presence.
The union of primordial purity and spontaneous presence.
So the primordial purity is about the Dhamma Kaya state.
And the spontaneous presence is more like Rupa Kaya,
which is the Buddhist compassion, loving kindness, spontaneously presence, like a near-Mana Kaya
state
to help people, beings, according to the need.
Is that what is the spontaneous presence?
Yeah, I mean, I think this primordial quality of the awareness is Dhamma Kaya.
And then it has naturally inherited.
And then the energy, the energy of quality is then Rupa Kaya as true.
And which is love and kindness and compassion.
So actually that, but then as in the teaching named many times as Rupa Kaya.
So that is like Rupa Kaya then can be divided into two.
And Sambo Kaya and then Nirmaka Kaya.
Nirmaka Kaya, both are Rupa Kaya.
Kaya, both are display of the energy of the primordial awareness, which is Dhamma Kaya.
I think that's your question, right?
Rinpoche, so the understanding of spontaneous presence, spontaneous presence.
So the spontaneous practice.
Presence.
Spontaneous presence.
In the book, sometimes we say.
They say calling love of power.
Oh, where is that?
The book, sometimes we talk about this primordial purity and the spontaneous presence.
Oh yeah, but primordial, I mean, and that is attention, if I understand that.
Primordial nature, primordial, what do you say?
Primordial purity.
Primordial purity, I think it's generally the nature of the mind.
Our nature of the mind is primordial purity status.
Is nobody purified or purified and nobody diluted is purity status.
So that is like as a Dhamma Kaya or the purity status.
Spontaneously present.
What is that present?
The richness call, it is a spontaneously right there.
There is not just a came later or going to come upward.
Is it right there?
So therefore, is it called, and you didn't match the effort to come to all things.
So therefore, is it?
Spontaneously presented, presented.
And if I add one more mode, spontaneously presented qualities.
That is not something that you search or came later, but is already there.
Yeah, it says the spontaneous presence of the five certainties is what you are talking about.
That's what you are talking?
So Rinpoche, the spontaneous presence, that's the quality of a Buddha
once would become enlightened, so that quality is right there as being spontaneous presence
to help beings.
Yeah, yeah.
That is a like this person, a spontaneously presented call.
It is the Buddha's call.
It is enlightenment call.
It is not something dribble up.
But according to teaching, Buddha's realization, the call.
It is begin to shine as we purify our mistakes.
It begin to shine again and again.
The ordinary nature is there, but we made mistakes.
And now we have to clear way.
As much as we clear way, that much is begin to shine.
Maybe it looks like developing, but reality is not developing.
Sun is already in the sky, but when the cloud and thick cover is covered,
then we don't see, but as much light in the cloud or the mysteries, sun begin to shine,
but that means it comes newly.
It is already there, but conditions are clearing way.
And because that's what the really teaching mentioned.
Thank you.
Okay, so that's okay.
Yeah, one more, then we stop.
Okay, two more, then we stop.
And three more, we stop.
And four more, we stop.
Okay, yeah.
Kimpo, many years ago, one time you were describing a feminine deity.
Feminine?
A feminine, feminine deity, female deity.
And you were saying that she was so beautiful, like a runway model.
That you never felt like you've looked enough, you can stop now.
You just wanted to keep looking.
Okay, now, several years ago, I was driving you on a Sunday back to Madara House.
And we were doing a purification practice.
And probably at the end for two, three, four minutes, I don't know how long,
everyone in the room kept repeating the syllable of hung, hung, hung.
And I remember when we got in the car, I said to you that I love doing that.
And I told you that at the time I was working in downtown Miami in a very wealthy financial
district, and there were all these very, very beautiful women in the neighborhood.
And I said, my sort of inner 14 year old would jump out and would want to look for the most
attractive woman I could see and get lost in it.
And I told you that by doing practicing hung, I was a bit freer of that,
and could let other impressions come in as well.
And then the third thing, I learned that Dungham Rinpoche had 11 children.
Seven from his first marriage, four from his second.
So my question finally is, what part does sexual energy play in, say,
generating bodhicitta, maintaining it, intensifying it, and waking up in the journey of
enlightenment?
So that's my question.
I think probably I'm not alone with that question.
Of course, it's quite, quite long.
But the desire, the sexual energy or the desire of the enlightenment,
such as his only Dungham Rinpoche's is not really desired as ours,
or many, many individualism, or many normal beings, beings.
They see that is in the teaching field.
I'm not just talking about only the his own Dungham Rinpoche,
but his own Dungham Rinpoche is considered one of the very highly realizing beings,
that. So therefore, for that highly enlightened realization beings,
that desire is, even though they appear as desires, but they don't have grasping,
clinging on that, it's just display.
Therefore, that attachment or that is nothing, any negatives,
because it's not really any attachment, nothing, any grasping.
So then what is it?
That is like invoking the inner call of the blessfulness and helping and activating that
realization more and more, or more deepening that.
So that's what really in the teaching said that.
Okay. Thank you, Lotus.
Thank you.
I was thinking about the question that Chris asked.
Thank you for asking the question, Chris.
The importance of the Sangha together, practicing together.
And I think it's very important because I feel there is an incredible energy,
practiced together with an open heart, not just to love each other.
I mean, we love each other, help each other.
But there is an energy that I cannot touch.
But when I practice during the week with the group, I leave the center.
It's like a good drug.
It's a good attraction.
It's an incredible, I don't have words to explain it, but it's an incredible energy
when we're here and we practice together.
So that energy, I don't think it's, you can't touch it.
Yeah, but this is really true.
A court really teaching, a court teaching, Sangha member practice a target with harmoniously,
peacefully, love and compassion.
Really, I mean, it's so powerful, so special in the teaching.
It's really good.
For example, I mean, we joined.
May all living beings have the happiness, cause happiness.
How many people are saying that?
How many people are thinking in this world, there's billions and billions of people.
They said, but how many people are saying that?
We're really saying that.
We mean that.
May all living beings have the happiness and the cause of happiness.
May every living being is free from suffering and the cause of suffering.
We're not talking, oh, may all our group have the happiness and the cause of happiness.
We're not discriminating anything this and that.
Now, our love and compassion is pervasive as the sky.
Sky, saying that, I mean, it's not just,
because we do this prayer, can't we become normal, casual, kind of like that.
But reality level is so precious, so powerful, so nugget.
And when we joined that target, the guru, oh, got more, what's called, oh gosh, oh gosh.
That ripple energy, that invisible energy is swinging really, according to teaching.
Teaching is going. It's part of the, really the practice of the bodhic.
That's what the Buddha taught.
Then we relax and calm and peaceful.
What we're not saying, oh, I'm the great, I'm the best, this, we're not.
We're relaxing, calming down, everything.
Relax in the naturals, just so ordinary, so simple, so basic.
Down to the earth, completely, really, nothing bumpy, this and that, clashing. So powerful.
So, I mean, it is really powerful, according to teaching.
That's why it cleans and purify all those, so it becomes really beautiful.
It benefits to us, it benefits to other beings,
and that's the one thing that's great we can do in our lives.
Of course, we can do a lot of beautiful things in life,
but we'd kind of like to touch our really cold heart.
Such we can do, and do together.
And then, of course, individually, also keep that up.
It's just really wonderful and beautiful.
That's what it is also in the teachings too.
Okay, thank you, thank everyone.
Thank you, thank you very much, everyone coming and participating.
Thank again, thank you.